## Object Oriented Programming With Real world Example


You are familiar with OOP concept theoretically but if interviewer ask to tell the concept with OOP concept then a lot of us are fail to answer.
Basically why we are write coding ,to solve our real world problem right. In OOP a logic is right base on the object with this features

1.abstraction
2.encapsulation
3.inheritance
4.polymorphism

There are a lot of Car,bike,ATM and coffee machine.and there brands and name also different. In OOP those are called object . Objects logic are done by classes for example ,by phone we can call,Bluetooth ,take photo etc. those every logic will be divide as classes.When we are creating class we need consider about SOLID principle.

### Abstraction

1.When we are making a call it only concatenate about the numbers and display that in screen,we really do not know how this connect with other number.
2. We send data from Bluetooth we really do not know how it connect with other phone or devices.

### Encapsulation

1.When we turn on the Bluetooth we can assess to connect to other phone but not access to call or send sms from that phone that level is hidden from encapsulation(some of abstraction is available).
2.If i connect with kajas phone and kajas connect with sumanie phone ,but i do not have access to connect with sumanie is phone through kajas phone.this kind of hidden will handle by encapsulation.

### Polymorphism

We can send normal text massage and we can send video massage also.

### Inheritance

we are humans. We inherit certain properties from the class 'Human' such as the ability to speak, breathe, eat, drink, etc. We can also take the example of cars. The class 'Car' inherits its properties from the class 'Automobiles' which inherits some of its properties from another class 'Vehicles'.