## What is a Client?

A client is a computer hardware device or software that accesses a service made available by a server. The server is often (but not always) located on a separate physical computer.


## What is a Server?

A server is a physical computer dedicated to run services to serve the needs of other computers. Depending on the service that is running, it could be a file server, database server, home media server, print server, or web server.


## What is a Host?

A host is a computer, connected to other computers for which it provides data or services over a network. In theory, every computer connected to a network acts as a host to other peers on the network. In essence, a host reflects the logical relationship of two or more computers on a network.


## What is a peer in computer network?

A relationship between two computers on the same network such that they are able to share information without a third computer having to act as a server. Peer-to-peer networking is often used on the Internet to facilitate the sharing of music and video files (often illegally) between users.


## What is network bandwidth?

Network bandwidth is a measurement indicating the maximum capacity of a wired or wireless communications link to transmit data over a network connection in a given amount of time. Typically, bandwidth is represented in the number of bits, kilobits, megabits or gigabits that can be transmitted in 1 second. Synonymous with capacity, bandwidth describes data transfer rate. Bandwidth is not a measure of network speed -- a common misconception.


## What is jitter?

Information is transported from your computer in data packets across the internet. They are usually sent at regular intervals and take a set amount of time. Jitter is when there is a time delay in the sending of these data packets over your network connection. This is often caused by network congestion, and sometimes route changes.

Essentially, the longer data packets take to arrive, the more jitter can negatively impact the video and audio quality.


## What is a packet?

In networking, a packet is a small segment of a larger message. Data sent over computer networks*, such as the Internet, is divided into packets. These packets are then recombined by the computer or device that receives them.


## What Does Frame Mean?

In networking, a frame is a unit of data. A frame works to help identify data packets used in networking and telecommunications structures. Frames also help to determine how data receivers interpret a stream of data from a source.


## What is Local Host?

When you call an IP address on your computer, you try to contact another computer on the internet but when you call the IP address 127.0.0.1 then you are communicating with the localhost. Localhost is always your own computer. Your computer is talking to itself when you call the localhost. Your computer not always directly identifies the localhost. Within your personal network localhost has a separate IP address like 192.168.0.1.(for most cases) which is different to the one you use on the internet. This is usually dynamically assigned by the internet service provider (ISP). Localhost can be seen as a server that is used on your own computer. 

Developers use the localhost to test web applications and programs. Network administrators use the loopback to test network connections. Another use for the localhost is the hosts file, where you can use the loopback to block malicious websites. 


## Bit rate

Network connections can send bits very fast. We measure that speed using the bit rate, the number of bits of data that are sent each second.


## Latency

Another way to measure the speed of a computer network is latency. You might guess what that means from the word itself: latency measures how late the bits arrive. To put it in more formal terms: latency is the time between the sending of a data message and the receiving of that message, measured in milliseconds.


## Noise

Noise is any undesired signal in a communication circuit. Another definition calls noise unwanted disturbances superimposed on a useful signal, which tends to obscure its information content. There are many varieties of noise; however, the four most important to the telecommunication/data communication technologist are thermal noise, intermodulation noise, crosstalk and impulse noise.


## Attenuation 

Attenuation is the loss of signal strength in networking cables or connections. This typically is measured in decibels (dB) or voltage and can occur due to a variety of factors. It may cause signals to become distorted or indiscernible. An example of this is Wi-Fi signal and strength getting noticeably weaker the further that your device is from the router. 


## Distortion

Distortion is a term used to describe an interruption of transmitting signals that cause an unclear reception. Distortion is commonly found in sound generated or received by a computer, video or display signals and data cables such as network cables.