## Characteristics of RAM

- RAM chips are widely used in the normal operations of a computer for starting and loading the operating system and applications.

- Much faster to read from and write

- Data in RAM stays there until the computer is running

- A RAM chip allows you to store multiple gigabytes (GB) of data.

- A 32 bit PC can have a maximum of 4 GB of RAM while a 64 bit PC can have 16 exabytes of RAM

## Characteristics of ROM

- You can write data only once. However, once it is written, you can read it any number of times

- A ROM chip is used mainly in the start-up process of a modern computer

- A ROM, non-volatile memory stores only several megabytes (MB) of data, up to 4 MB or more per chip

## Types of RAM

DRAM -Dynamic RAM must be continuously refreshed, or otherwise, all contents are lost.

SRAM - Static RAM is faster, needs less power but is more expensive. However, it does need to be refreshed like DRAM.

Synchronous Dynamic RAM (SDRAM) - This type of RAM can run at very high clock speeds.

DDR - Double Data Rate provide synchronous Random Access Memory

## Types of ROM

EPROM: The full form of EPROM is Erasable Programmable Read-only memory. It stores instructions, but you can erase only by exposing the memory to ultraviolet light.

PROM: The full form of PROM is Programmable Read-Only memory. This type of ROM is written or programmed using a particular device.

EEPROM stands for electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory. It stores and deletes instructions on a special circuit.

Mask ROM is a full form of MROM is a type of read-only memory (ROM) whose contents can be programmed only by an integrated circuit manufacturer.

## Advantage of RAM

- Silent: RAM does not have any moving parts, so its operation is completely silent.

- Power-efficient: RAM uses much less power than disk drives.

- Saves your system battery: It helps you to reduce carbon emissions and extend your battery life.

## Advantages of ROM

- This memory is not lost when power is switched off. Therefore, it is called non-volatile memory.

- It can't be changed accidentally

- Cheaper than RAMs

- Static and do not require refreshing


## Characteristics of SRAM

- SRAM is faster than DRAM

- Several times more expensive than DRAMs

- Takes up much more space than DRAMs

- Consume more power than DRAMs

- Usage: level 1 or level 2 cache

- Cycle time is much shorter compared to DRAM because it does not require to pause between accesses.

- It is often used only as a memory cache

## Characteristics of DRAM

- Cost-effective

- It has a short data lifetime

- Requires to refresh

- Slower compared to SRAM

- Less power consumption


## What is PROM

PROM stands for Programmable Read Only Memory. It is a computer memory chip, and it is possible to program it once after creation. After programming the PROM, the information we write to it becomes permanent. Therefore, we cannot erase or delete that written data.  The PROM chip was commonly used in earlier computers’ BIOS systems.

After creating PROM, all the bits are ‘1’. If a certain bit should be 0, we can make that 0 by burning. One major drawback of PROM is that it is not possible to update it. In other words, we cannot reprogram it. Instead, we have to discard that and replace it with a new chip.

## What is EPROM

EPROM stands for Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory. We can erase and reprogram an EPROM without replacing it. It is possible to erase and write to it by exposing the memory chip to ultraviolet light. Moreover, it is easier to recognize EPROM via transparent fused quartz window in the top of the package.

EPROM is used more commonly than PROM because it allows the manufacturers to modify or reprogram the chip.
 
## What is EEPROM

EEPROM stands for Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory. It is a memory chip that we can erase and reprogram using electrical charge. It consists of a collection of floating gate transistors. The flash memory is a type of EEPROM which has a higher density and lower number of write cycles.

EEPROM is a replacement of both PROM and EPROM. It is used in many applications including computers, microcontrollers, smart cards, etc. to store data, erase and to reprogram.